Welcome back to our study of the book of Proverbs.
We are in chapter 7.
And I'm going to start reading in verse 10, okay?
So open up your Bibles, Proverbs, chapter 7, and verse 10.
And behold, a woman comes to meet him, dressed as a harlot and cunning of heart.
She is boisterous and rebellious.
Her feet do not remain at home.
She is now in the streets, now in the squares, and lurks by every corner.
So she seizes him and kisses him, and with a brazen face she says to him, I was due to offer peace offerings.
Today I have paid my vows.
Therefore I have come out to meet you, to seek your presence earnestly.
And I have found you.
I have spread my couch with coverings, with colored linens from Egypt.
I have sprinkled my bed with mirth, aloes and cinnamon.
Come let us drink our fill of love until morning.
Let us delight ourselves with caresses.
For my husband is not at home and he has gone on a long journey.
He has taken a bag of money with him.
At the full moon, he will come home with her many persuasions.
She entices him with her flattering lips.
She seduces him.
Okay, let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, we come before you in the name of your son.
And Lord, this is a difficult text, an ugly text, but a necessary one to warn us of the dangers of sin.
Please, Father, I pray that you would work in the heart of the children and the youth who are studying proverbs with me, that they would see and they would understand
that we live behind enemy lines and that in many ways this world is a spiritually dangerous place.
Lord, I pray that you would increase the fear of the Lord and all of the ones who will hear this series, that they would walk in holiness, that they would separate themselves, not just from the world, but that they would separate themselves unto your son, Jesus Christ.
Lord, help us now as we teach through this.
In Jesus' name, amen.
Well, let me do something of a review, okay?
First of all, this text is referring to a woman who is unfaithful to her husband and her family, and she's also more than willing to do damage to others for the sake of her own delight, her own enjoyment, her own pleasure.
But the way we're going to look at this, because
All of her characteristics are also the very characteristics we find in the world.
When I refer to the world, I'm not talking about the globe, I'm talking about that order, that system of thought, ideology, attitudes, actions, deeds that are contrary to the nature and will of God.
We live in a fallen world.
and trying to live as Christians in the midst of that fallen world can be extremely difficult.
Why?
Because just like this woman who's trying to tempt a young man to do something very, very wrong.
So the world tries to draw us away from Christ and to do those things which are contrary to his holy nature and his holy will.
So as we go on, we're going to look at this.
Now we've studied a big
portion of this.
So I want to review what we've seen thus far.
First of all, remember this woman, she is symbolizing for us the world and it's attempt to attract us away from Christ.
So first of all, in verse 10, the world's outward appearance hides its inner reality.
Look in verse 10.
Let me get back over there.
And behold, the woman comes to meet him
dressed as a harlot and cunning of heart.
The world, let me put it this way.
It dresses itself up in a way that seeks to draw us, to attract us, and to tempt us.
So outside though, it may be quite beautiful, but inside.
Well, Jesus described it as dead men's bones.
So the world's outward appearance hides its inner reality.
Also in verse 10,
It says that this woman is cunning, the world is cunning.
And literally, in the Hebrew, it's kept secret of heart.
What does it mean that she's not showing her true intentions?
The world doesn't show its true intentions.
The world will sometimes come alongside of us like it's our friend, like it wants to help us, even that it wants to protect us from God.
But the
the inward intention that sometimes we can't see is evil and harmful.
And if we listen to the world, if we just look at the propaganda, we will find ourselves in a very, very dark place from which we may not be able to return.
So the world is also cunning.
And then in verse 11, look at this woman.
She is boisterous.
The world is boisterous.
The idea here is that all around this woman,
There is turmoil.
There is chaos.
There is loudness.
There's, there's not peace.
And what you'll find is that the world makes a lot of noise.
But when all the noise dies down, it just has misery and no peace.
What we're looking for in life is not a lot of clamoring or chaos, but order and peace.
And only the Lord can give that to us.
not the world.
Also in verse 11, she is rebellious.
The world is rebellious.
It's rebellious against all that is right, all that is good.
It is rebellious against the character of God and the will of God as it is revealed in Scripture.
Sinclair Ferguson said this, men hate God's will because it's not theirs.
You see, God is good.
He's holy.
He's righteous.
He's loving and His will conforms to that.
So everything He tells us to do is loving and kind and good.
But you see, fallen man is not that way.
The Bible says clearly that we were born with a corrupt moral nature and we long for evil and we long to do evil deeds.
And it is only in Christ that our hearts can be changed and we can turn back to living in a way that conforms to the will of God.
Now also in verse 11 says she is boisterous and rebellious.
Her feet do not remain at home.
She's not content.
The world has no peace.
The world has in reality, no hope.
The world is never content.
And if you give yourself to the world, you will never be content.
You find some of the most famous people in the world and they still are not happy.
They want to be more famous.
You find some of the richest people in the world and they're just not happy.
They want to be richer.
You find people with great power and yet that power is not enough.
They want more power over more people.
It is only in Christ in believing in Him and trusting in Him and in doing His will that we can truly find contentment.
Now, we're in verse 12 now, and this is where we're going to begin our study.
The world is also, and I want you to listen to this very carefully.
The world is predatory.
It is like a predator.
A predator chases down a prey in order to devour it.
Look at verses 12 and 13.
It says, she is now in the streets, now in the squares, and lurks
by every corner.
So she seizes him and kisses him.
And with a brazen face, she says to him certain things to attract him.
But let's look.
First of all, it says the woman is in the streets.
Verse 12, she's prowling around like someone on the hunt.
And then it also says she is lurking at every corner.
Now the word lurk here literally means to lie and wait.
like setting up an ambush, like setting up an ambush.
When I was a boy, of course, on our, I would hunt and fish, but I would also trap.
And you set out traps and you disguise them so that the trap is able to spring before the animal knows that it's actually there.
And that's what she's doing here.
She's setting up an ambush.
She's hiding her true intentions and she's wanting to capture this young man and use him for her own pleasure.
That's a great description of the world.
In verse 13, it says, she seizes him.
She seizes him.
Now the word here means to take hold of, with power, with force, even with violence.
It means to grab
hold of someone and to overcome them and overpower them.
Okay.
The moment she grabs him, she's in control.
You know, my wife, Chado, she sent me, she and I used to go through the jungle everywhere in Peru.
And she sent me a kind of a video this morning.
And it was a Cayman, which is an, an at what you'd call an, I guess, an alligator.
And it was about, I'd say eight feet.
So it was a pretty big alligator.
And all of a sudden, coming out of the shore, out of the bushes, it's a jaguar.
And when I was in the jungle, and I would be with the guys that would hunt and things in the jungle, the, the aguaruna tribe, that they weren't afraid of a lot.
But everyone in the jungle was afraid of a jaguar.
It has the strongest jaw strength, I think, of any cat, even stronger than a lion.
And in this video that my wife sent me, this jaguar just leaps off the bank on top of this huge alligator.
And they're underwater for, I don't like, seem like 10 seconds.
Then they come up out of the water and this jaguar drags that huge alligator onto the beach.
and then just proceeds to, uh, to kill it.
And I can't think of anything more terrifying.
Once that animal gets a hold of you, it's not letting go and there's nothing you can do about it.
And so when you're in the jungle and you're thinking, you know, you're walking through a path and you're just thinking everything is okay and you don't know that
behind you and beside you and around you is this dangerous thing, like a jaguar that once it gets a hold of you, it's not going to let go.
It's going to overpower you.
And that is one of the greatest descriptions of sin.
So when you think of sin, I don't want you to think of it just as something that you would do, like
commit a sinful deed or say a sinful thing.
I want you to think about it as something that is hunting you, something that is after you, a predator, like a jaguar, like an alligator in the swamp, like a shark in the ocean, like if you were the size of a fly caught in a net, caught in a web and a spider was coming after you.
All of these are terrifying, but none of these things I just described are more terrifying.
than sin.
Sin wrecks young people, children, sin wrecks adults, wrecks families, wrecks churches, sin wrecks nations, sin has wrecked the world, the entire human race.
So the world is predatory and sin is a predator.
I want you to listen to this text from Genesis 4, 7.
It says, God told Cain, sin is crouching at the door and its desire is for you.
But you must master it.
So he's saying, sin is at the door of your tent, like a wild animal, like a jaguar, like a, like a ravenous wolf or giant lion.
It's at the door of your tent.
And what is it desires you?
Now, this is not a good desire like it loves you.
This is a hungry desire.
It doesn't care about you at all.
Its only desire is to destroy you, to devour you, to feed upon you.
I was listening to a man one time he was talking about being attacked by a shark and he said, possibly the most terrifying thing is that when you look into the eye of that shark, it's just
Black, emotionalist, it shows no, it has a lack of emotion.
It shows no pity, no compassion.
It only wants to devour you.
And that sin, in Proverbs 5, 22, it says, regarding the fool, it says, his own iniquities will capture the wicked and he will be held with the cords of his sin.
So it entraps him and it holds him.
It's like Gulliver's travels when, you know, he's tied down on the ground and he can't get out.
Or like again, someone trapped into a gigantic spider web from which you cannot remove yourself.
And then you look up and here comes the spider drawing closer and closer and closer.
It's like being tied to a tree out in
Some African plane and all of a sudden you're surrounded by hyena after hyena after hyena and there's absolutely nothing you can do.
Now some of you may be saying, Brother Paul, you shouldn't talk that way.
You're giving us nightmares.
Sometimes nightmares can be good.
Sin destroys everything and it takes no prisoners.
It will devour you.
Let's go on.
So we've said here, I want to make sure sin is a predator.
The world is predatory.
Sin is a predator, but also sometimes sinners, other individuals who are given to sin also act like predators.
Proverbs 4, 16 says this, talking about the wicked, for they cannot sleep unless they do evil.
So there are people out there that their whole life is set to just
doing evil, living in a manner contrary to God.
Now, that in itself is bad enough, but look what else it says.
And they are robbed of sleep unless they make someone stumble.
You see, sinners and a sinful world, the idea is not just that they want to sin and that they do sin, but they want to draw other people into their sin.
It's like when you commit a crime,
When you're living a life of sin, in your conscience, you feel guilty.
But if you can get more people to join you, it somehow calms your conscience.
It soothes your conscience because you're not the only one committing this evil.
You can look around you and see other people doing it.
But on the day of judgment, that won't help you.
That won't help you a bit because you will stand there alone in your evil.
So sinners are predatory.
And then finally, and you need to understand this, the devil is a predator.
Now, you know, a lot of times, young people, when you see pictures and drawings of a devil, it's a little guy in a red suit with a tail and a pitchfork and some horns.
Or maybe you've seen movies you shouldn't have seen, and he's depicted as something far more horrible.
Well, here's the problem.
He is monstrous.
He is gruesome.
He is evil and vile.
Yet for the most part, he portrays himself as quite beautiful, quite attractive.
Someone who can bring pleasure, relief, joy, purpose,
So what you need to realize is that when the devil comes to you to take you away from the paths that God wants you to walk in, he's not going to present himself as a monster.
He's going to present himself as someone delightful, someone attractive, someone who can give you everything your sinful heart desires.
So he's a predator.
So in 1 Peter 5, 8, it says, be of sober spirit.
Beyond the alert, why?
Your adversary, the devil, prowls around like a roaring lion seeking someone to devour.
You know, most of us have never been hunted.
I've heard men talk, men up in the Arctic Circle,
guys who hunt up in Canada about being surrounded by wolves.
And wolves aren't like little dogs.
They're very, very large and very, very dangerous.
Or in Africa, men being surrounded by a pack of lions or a pack of hyenas.
Or in Asia, the gigantic Bengal tiger.
You know, there's some places where people walk down
paths to their, to their farmlands and things like that.
And they actually wear a mask, a human mask on the back of their head.
Why?
Because the tiger will come up where you're not looking and attack you that way.
And so I can't think of anything more terrifying than being hunted, but that's exactly what the devil is doing.
every day all around the world to individuals just like you and me.
And if it's not him, that's the who's who work with him.
Other fallen spirits, but also people who are given to sin and want others to join them.
And the only way that you can really stay safe from this is to study God's Word, to apply God's Word,
to pray, you know, in the Lord's Prayer, what does it say?
Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
And one more thing, surround yourself with other Christians who love the Lord and are going to speak into your life.
Now that's primarily within the context of a local church, but also hopefully if you're in a Christian home, your mother and father listening to their advice and guarding it and keeping it,
And then make sure that your friends are the type of people that are going to encourage you to walk with Christ.
You know, there's a, I forget what philosopher said it, but it's a good statement.
If you're the smartest person in the room, you're in the wrong room.
What we mean by that is it's good to associate with people smarter than you because, well, you'll become smarter.
Well, we can turn it with regard to Christianity.
If you're the godliest person in the room, you're in the wrong room.
You want to be with people who have walked with Christ longer than you have, who have grown in their maturity far beyond what you have grown so that they can pull you up to them.
But if you surround yourself with immature Christians or you surround yourself, even worse with people who are not Christians, but given to rebellion
It's going to take its toll on you.
So remember, this is a predatory world.
There are predatory people.
There's definitely a predatory devil.
The only way that we can remain safe is staying within the will of God and that journey.
Well, it's not a lone wolf journey.
We need others around us to speak into our lives.
and to help us as we seek to go on with the Lord.
All right, well, let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, thank you for your word.
And I pray, dear God, that you would use it in the life of each and every young person who's listening to these teachings.
Father, please help them.
Please, Lord God, that they would know Christ, and that in knowing Christ, they would love Him.
They would seek to be conformed to his image.
They would seek to know his will and walk in it.
Oh, Father, I pray you raise up a generation of young people who if we were to cut them with a knife, they would bleed the Bible.
Yes, Lord.
In Jesus name.
Amen.